                         The Chartjunk Debate

                       A Close Examination of Recent Findings

                                         Stephen Few, Perceptual Edge
                                   Visual Business Intelligence Newsletter

                                            April, May, and June 2011

In his first book, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information (1983), Edward Tufte introduced the term
"chartjunk." Ever since, people involved in data presentation have used this term to condemn what they
perceive as flaws of various types in graphs. Let's remind ourselves of how Tufte defined the term originally.

     The interior decoration of graphics generates a lot of ink that does not tell the viewer anything new...
     Regardless of its cause, it is all non-data-ink or redundant data-ink, and it is often chartjunk. (The
     Visual Display of Quantitative Information, p. 107)

     Fortunately most chartjunk does not involve artistic considerations. It is simply conventional graphic
     paraphernalia routinely added to every display that passes by: over-busy grid lines and excess ticks,
     redundant representations of the simplest data, the debris of computer plotting, and many of the
     devices generating design variation. (ibid, p. 107)

     Chartjunk does not achieve the goals of its propagators. The overwhelming fact of data graphics is that
     they stand or fall on their content, gracefully displayed. (ibid, p.121)

     Chartjunk can turn bores into disasters, but it can never rescue a thin data set. The best designs...
     are intriguing and curiosity-provoking, drawing the viewer into the wonder of the data, sometimes by
     narrative power, sometimes by immense detail, and sometimes by elegant presentation of simple but
     interesting data. (ibid, p. 121)

According to Tufte, chartjunk consists of non-data and redundant data elements in a graph. It comes in various
types: sometimes artistic decoration, but more often in the form of conventional graphical elements that are
unnecessary in that they add no value. Chartjunk is not informative and is often harmful.

I agree with Tufte's basic assessment, but we differ somewhat in our understanding of what qualifies as useful
expressions of information. Embellishments can at times, when properly chosen and designed, represent
information redundantly in useful ways, and even when they aren't information in and of themselves, can
meaningfully support the display of information. Had Tufte said nothing more than the paragraphs above,
chartjunk might have never become the rallying cry of a vicious debate that has raged for years. In 1990,
however, he published his second book, Envisioning Information, and included a chart that was designed by
Nigel Holmes about the price of diamonds, which appears on the next page.

Copyright © 2011 Stephen Few, Perceptual Edge  Page 1 of 11
Here's what he said about it:

Consider this unsavory exhibit at right­chockablock with cliché and stereotype, coarse humor, and
a content-empty third dimension. It is the product of a visual sensitivity in which a thigh-graph with a
fishnet-stocking grid counts as a Creative Concept. Everything counts, but nothing matters. The data-
thin (and thus uncontextual) chart mixes up changes in the value of money with changes in diamond
prices, a crucial confusion because the graph chronicles a time of high inflation.

Lurking behind chartjunk is contempt both for the information and for the audience. Chartjunk
promoters imagine that numbers and details are boring, dull, and tedious, requiring ornament to
enliven. Cosmetic decoration, which frequently distorts the data, will never salvage an underlying
lack of content. If the numbers are boring, then you've got the wrong numbers. Credibility vanishes in
clouds of chartjunk; who would trust a chart that looks like a video game?

Worse is contempt for our audience, designing as if readers were obtuse and uncaring. In fact,
consumers of graphics are often more intelligent about the information at hand than those who
fabricate the data decoration. And, no matter what, the operating moral premise of information design
should be that our readers are alert and caring; they may be busy, eager to get on with it, but they
are not stupid. Clarity and simplicity are completely opposite simple-mindedness. Disrespect for the
audience will leak through, damaging communication. What E. B. White said of writing is equally true
for information design: "No one can write decently who is distrustful of the reader's intelligence, or
whose attitude is patronizing."

(Edward Tufte, Envisioning Information, Graphics Press, 1990, p.34-35)

And people think I'm harsh! These were fighting words. It isn't hard to imagine how Holmes felt about this. In
Holmes' mind, Tufte became his nemesis and ever after these titans came to embody two sides of a debate
that has raged for years. Unfortunately, this debate has rarely been conducted in a rational, evidence-based
manner. It has mostly been fueled by people's blind commitment to one camp or the other: two armies
hunkered down in their trenches lobbing insults at the enemy like flaming balls of napalm.

Copyright © 2011 Stephen Few, Perceptual Edge                           Page 2 of 11
A study by Scott Bateman, Regan L. Mandryk, Carl Gutwin, Aaron Genest, David McDine, and Christopher
Brooks of the University of Saskatchewan titled "Useful Junk? The Effects of Visual Embellishment on
Comprehension and Memorability of Charts" recently entered the field of battle as a potentially refreshing
alternative. To use it as a constructive contribution to the debate, it's important that we understand what it
actually says and the validity of its findings.

Since this study was made public, it has created a fair degree of buzz. Proponents of artistic visualizations
of all types, whether similar in approach to Nigel Holmes' or not, have used this study to defend their work.
Holmes himself declared this study a victory for his cause. Some in the embellishment camp have exceeded
the study's reach by using it to justify design practices that research has firmly established as harmful and
ineffective. Little of what it's been used to support, however, is justified.

The Study

This research was designed to test the influence of chartjunk vs. plain ("minimalist") graphs on two effects:
comprehension and recall. Fourteen data visualizations were used, each consisting of two versions: one
"embellished" and one "plain." Twenty participants were recruited from the university. Each of the participants
was shown all 14 charts, but only one version of each (7 embellished and 7 plain). For the comprehension
part of the study--what the researchers called "reading and description"--participants viewed the charts one
at a time on a computer screen and followed the instructions of a tester who sat with them. For each chart,
participants were asked to answer the four following questions, further assisted by supplementary prompts as
needed:

Topic    Question                              Supplementary Prompt

Subject  What is the chart about?              Tell me about the basic subject of the chart.

Values   What are the displayed categories     Tell me how the chart is organized and any relevant
         and values?                           values.

Trend    What is the basic trend of the graph? Tell me whether the chart shows any changes and
                                                             describe these changes.

Value Message Is the author trying to communicate Is the author trying to get across a specific point or
                       some message through the chart? is he or she merely presenting objective information.

For the recall part of the study, participants were divided into two groups: 10 were tested for immediate recall
and 10 for long-term recall (two to three weeks later). In both cases participants were asked to recall as
many of the charts as possible. Afterwards, for each that they recalled, the tester asked them the same four
questions above and recorded what they correctly remembered. Following this, the tester then reminded the
participant about the charts that they failed to recall and asked the four questions about those charts as well.

The Findings

In the Abstract section that begins the published paper, the researchers summarized their findings as follows:

     We found that people's accuracy in describing the embellished charts was no worse than for plain
     charts, and that their recall after a two-to-three-week gap was significantly better. Although we are
     cautious about recommending that all charts be produced in this style, our results question some of the
     premises of the minimalist approach to chart design.

Allow me to restate the findings with relevant qualifications:

     When a simple message--one that could be expressed verbally in a single sentence--is presented in
     a chart that includes embellishments relevant to that message, along with quantitative values that are
     related to but incidental to the message, then a reader will comprehend the message as well as he
     would had the graph lacked embellishment and will also better recall the basic subject of the chart and
     pattern in the data two or three weeks later, but no better soon afterwards.

Copyright © 2011 Stephen Few, Perceptual Edge                        Page 3 of 11
That's a mouthful, but it more fully describes the study's finding. It isn't surprising that we can usually recall an
image that expresses a clever and entertaining visual metaphor better than we can recall an unembellished
chart. Research has clued us into this for many years. Recalling the embellished chart better is only useful,
however, to the degree that it conveys the message. In the case of Holmes' charts--those used in this study at
least--the embellishments do in fact support the message and therefore serve as a useful mnemonic device.
The application of this, however, is quite limited in scope. To the credit of the researchers, they suggested that
"some charts and some topics may not be amenable to Holmes-style visual presentations." How true.

Two additional findings were reported in the study that weren't mentioned in the abstract:

     1. "Participants saw value messages in the Holmes charts significantly more often than in the plain
          charts."

     2. "Participants found the Holmes charts more attractive, most enjoyed them, and found that they were
          easiest and fastest to remember."

Again, there are no surprises here.

In their conclusion, the researchers overreached when they stated: "Many experts suggest that visual
embellishments and `chart junk' cause interpretation problems and should be removed from all information
charts, but many examples exist of embellished charts that seem to be successful." Many examples? Actually,
the examples in this study consisted only of a few embellished charts created by one person--Nigel Holmes--
and they only succeed for an extremely specific, quite limited purpose.

Methodological Shortcomings

Beyond the expected finding stated above, this study is interesting as an example of methodological failures
that are all too common in research. Built into it was the following set of inappropriate assumptions:

     1. The purpose for which the charts in the test were used is typical of the way quantitative graphs are
          used in the real world.

     2. The embellished charts by Nigel Holmes' represent extreme examples of chartjunk.

     3. The plain charts were designed in the manner that proponents of graphical "minimalism" advocate.

     4. A study involving 20 university students can produce trustworthy results.

     5. This study identified relevant factors and adequately controlled them.

Typical Uses of Quantitative Graphs

Embellished charts like those used in this study are only typical of a few news publications, probably best
represented by that litterer of hotel hallways, USA Today. This type of embellishment, however, is not at all
typical of quantitative graphs as they're used elsewhere, although some infographics of the non-journalistic
type have adopted aspects of this style in recent years. The embellished charts that were used in this study
exhibited the following characteristics:

     1. The chart communicates an extremely simple, brief message; one that could be stated in words as a
          single sentence and in fact is summed up in the chart's title.

     2. The chart contains a small set of quantitative values, which illustrates the message.

     3. The embellishment is tied metaphorically to the message of the chart.

     4. The chart is designed by a talented graphic artist.

These characteristics describe few of the graphs that are produced in the world and serve a different purpose
than most. They are designed to catch the reader's eye, entertain, and make a simple point quickly. The values
contained in the graph are incidental to its purpose; certainly not intended for close inspection. Because the

Copyright © 2011 Stephen Few, Perceptual Edge  Page 4 of 11
embellishments are visual, play a role in communicating the message, and are designed by a talented graphic
artist, we tend to remember charts of this type. To the degree that the message is important and the information
contained in the message is sufficient, the fact that these charts are memorable is useful. When the message
is important, but greater understanding is needed, however, these charts fail. When charts of this type are
promoted as examples of the way data visualization for other purposes should be designed, they are harmful.

The following two examples illustrate how graphs are more typically used in the world:

                                                                2010 Sales

USD                           West                              Central                       East
7000
6500                                                                                                            Product Type
6000
5500                                                                                                               Espresso
5000                                                                                                               Cof f ee
                                                                                                                   Herbal Tea
                                                                                                                   Tea

4500 Average
4000

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500  Feb Apr Jun Aug Oct Dec Feb Apr Jun Aug Oct Dec Feb Apr Jun Aug Oct Dec

            Product                       West                           2010 Sales                       East
          Columbian
                                                                               Central
               Lemon
      Caf f e Mocha           20K    40K        0K 10K 20K 0K   20K      40K  0K 10K 20K 0K   20K    40K        0K 10K 20K
  Decaf Espresso                                       Prof it                       Prof it                           Prof it

         Chamomile
          Darjeeling
           Earl Grey

Decaf Irish Cream
         Caf f e Latte
                  Mint
          Green Tea
            Amaretto

Regular Espresso

                          0K

                              Sales                             Sales                         Sales

              Average

When graphs are used in this more typical manner, they should exhibit the following characteristics:

     1. Present all the data that is needed for the audience to see and understand what's meaningful.

     2. Present nothing that isn't needed.

     3. Represent data accurately.

     4. Represent data in a way that is easy for the eyes to perceive and the brain to interpret.

     5. Provide appropriate context for interpreting the meaning of the data.

No one graph can display the full story that lives in a set of data, but it should provide the richest view possible
for understanding what matters. Look at the graph above and try to imagine how this story might be told using
a chart that's embellished in the way that was used in the chartjunk study. I can't imagine that Nigel Holmes
would ever propose that a chart of that type should be used to examine the data in the salary graph above.
I suspect that he understands the limited purpose for which embellishments of this type are useful. Holmes'
charts vs. simple charts engage our eyes and brains in different ways: Holmes' into the metaphor and well-
designed plain charts into the details.

Copyright © 2011 Stephen Few, Perceptual Edge                                                                   Page 5 of 11
Extreme Embellishment

The researchers stated: "In our study we intentionally chose the most extreme type of visual embellishment
that we could, namely, the full cartoon imagery used by Holmes." Actually, Holmes' style embellishments are
not an extreme example of the kind of chartjunk that is commonly found in graphs. Rather, they are well-
executed examples of a particular style of embellishment (not entirely chartjunk) that is not at all typical outside
of a few publications like USA Today.

Here's an extreme example of typical chartjunk:

Trust me when I say that I've seen a lot worse. To produce this example, I merely took advantage of handy
features in tools like Excel that people commonly use to unintentionally render simple quantitative messages
completely incomprehensible. Photos, decorative fonts, 3D objects and perspective, gradients of color in the
background, unnecessary grid lines made worse by making them dark, and artsy texture patterns are all readily
available, to name a few. Below is another version of this graph, without embellishment:

Is there any question that the embellished version would be much harder and less efficient to read and
understand, compared to the plain version?

Copyright © 2011 Stephen Few, Perceptual Edge  Page 6 of 11
Well Designed Simplicity

The plain charts used in this study were in fact plain ugly. In addition to being stripped of nonessential ink, the
plain charts ignored basic principles of design, resulting in displays that were unnecessarily hard on the eyes.

By displaying bar outlines only (no fill color) and enclosing the chart as a whole in a border of equal salience
as the bar outlines, an uncomfortable visual effect is created. Below is a better-designed version of the same
chart:

                                               Employment Costs for a Steelworker per Hour

                                                      Average of first 9 months of 1982 in U.S. Dollars

                      0                        5  10  15  20                                             25

United States $23.99

West Germany $13.45

France $12.37

Japan $11.08

Britain $9.32

                                  South Korea $2.39

Now, when we compare this plain version to the embellished version on the following page, it isn't hard to
understand why the embellished image might stick in our heads longer and why both charts do an equal
job of communicating the basic message that steelworkers are paid a lot more in the United States than
elsewhere, especially in South Korea. But if we want to dig further and compare the values, we can only use
the embellished version to do this by reading the numbers, for the graphical elements fail this test.

Copyright © 2011 Stephen Few, Perceptual Edge                                                                Page 7 of 11
Some of the plain charts in the study were designed in confusing ways, such as the line graph below that
connects positive and negative values without showing a reference line for zero:

Here's a properly designed plain version:

                                         Over Their Own Barrel

                  OPEC's Current International Account Balance in Billions of Dollars
120

100

80

60

40

20

0

-20  1976                                      1977  1978  1979  1980  1981            1982
                                                           Year

Copyright © 2011 Stephen Few, Perceptual Edge                                                Page 8 of 11
Some of the plain charts were displayed in ways that most advocates of simplicity, including Tufte and me,
would never tolerate, such as the following pie chart.

The following bar graph displays the same data in a simpler, more understandable, and more visually pleasing
way:

                                                      The Cosmetics Dollar

                             Cents                    Where It Goes

                             per $

Manufacturer 60 0%                                5%  10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40%

Salaries, wages, and administration 19

Packaging 11

Promotion 10

Pretax profit 10

Ingredients                                    8

Interest and other expenses                    2

                         Retailier

Heat, light, salaies, wages and profits 40

It's interesting to note that the researchers chose to use simple, unembellished graphs to report their results.
The following graph was used to show that "for participants in the immediate recall group, there were no
differences in the required amount of prompting to recall subjects of the charts (t9=1.41, p=.097), categories
in the charts (t9=0.32, p=.379), or trends of the charts (t9=-0.32, p=.379) depending on whether or not charts
contained visual embellishments."

Copyright © 2011 Stephen Few, Perceptual Edge                                      Page 9 of 11
Small, Unrepresentative Test Groups

When research studies rely on a tiny group of test subjects and aren't careful to select a sample that represents
the larger population to which their findings are meant to apply, they can't be taken seriously. At best we can
treat the findings as suggestive of what might be true, but not conclusive.

Several problems in this study's design and in the way it was conducted raise flags of concern. Kaiser Fung
has done a fine job of identifying and describing them in his Junk Charts blog, so I won't reproduce his work
here.

Unconsidered and Uncontrolled Factors

Three factors in particular come to mind that should have been taken into account and controlled in this study:

     · Characteristics of a representative sample of quantitative graph users

     · Different purposes for which people use quantitative graphs

     · Different types of chart embellishment

The study suffered from ignoring these factors, producing results that cannot be trusted, despite the fact that
they are probably true, and cannot be used to evaluate the effects of chartjunk on most of the quantitative
graphs that are used in the world.

What Really Qualifies As Chartjunk?

Tufte's term "chartjunk" is perhaps a little too loosely defined. In my opinion, nothing that supports the chart's
message in a meaningful way is junk. Sometimes more than minimal ink and sometimes even redundant
content is needed to communicate a chart's message and drive it home. By defining chartjunk too broadly,
Tufte to some degree invited the heated controversy that has raged ever since.

The fundamental issue is whether embellishments support the data or to some degree distract from it or
distort it. Embellishments that represent data, even metaphorically, can themselves qualify as "data ink."
Embellishments that are not data in themselves can sometimes support the display of data in a useful manner.

Graphical embellishments can support the effectiveness of a data visualization in three potential ways: 1) by
engaging the interest of the reader (i.e., getting them to read the content), 2) by drawing the reader's attention
to particular items that merit emphasis, and 3) by making the message more memorable. Embellishments only
enhance effectiveness, however, if they refrain from undermining the message by significantly distracting from
it or misrepresenting it.

Copyright © 2011 Stephen Few, Perceptual Edge  Page 10 of 11
Tangential Benefits of this Study

This study contributes to data visualization research in the following ways:
     1. It reminds us that simple messages can at times be presented in a more engaging and memorable
          manner through the use of properly designed embellishments.
     2. It prompts us to define "chartjunk" more precisely. Embellishments are not always useless or
          damaging.
     3. It prompts us to categorize chart embellishments into various types and to test their effects individually.

Future research can help us better understand the relative benefits of embellished vs. unembellished graphs.
Until then, and perhaps forever, the debate will continue.

Note of Gratitude

I want to thank Scott Bateman of the research team for graciously supporting my efforts to write this article.
Though he surely knows that I am not a fan of chartjunk, he provided me with his research data and answered
all of my questions, without reservation. This openness to other perspectives is a sign of a fine researcher.

Discuss this Article

Share your thoughts about this article by visiting The Chartjunk Debate thread in our discussion forum.

About the Author

Stephen Few has worked for over 25 years as an IT innovator, consultant, and teacher. Today, as Principal
of the consultancy Perceptual Edge, Stephen focuses on data visualization for analyzing and communicating
quantitative business information. He provides training and consulting services, writes the quarterly Visual
Business Intelligence Newsletter, and speaks frequently at conferences. He is the author of three books: Show
Me the Numbers: Designing Tables and Graphs to Enlighten, Information Dashboard Design: The Effective
Visual Communication of Data, and Now You See It: Simple Visualization Techniques for Quantitative Analysis.
You can learn more about Stephen's work and access an entire library of articles at www.perceptualedge.com.
Between articles, you can read Stephen's thoughts on the industry in his blog.

Copyright © 2011 Stephen Few, Perceptual Edge  Page 11 of 11
